# Free Software Fix-Up: Oxwall

I've known of my passion for technology for many years, after being fascinated by what appeared on my screen upon clicking the "HTML" button in a website builder over fourteen years ago. Over the many years since, as web design/development and software engineering became my hobby and later my profession, I discovered my passion not only for building new things but also renovating those that already existed, constantly challenging myself to make the projects I've worked on more secure, cost-efficient (especially in the cloud), performant, and modern.

Many years ago, I discovered open-source social networking software called Oxwall, whose broad featureset enabled users to create online communities, provided they had some server space on which to run it. Since I was just exploring Oxwall in my free time and did not want to spend any money on this small, personal project, I found a free web hosting provider and got an installation up and running there. I did not have to worry about Oxwall's compatibility with this hosting, as Oxwall was built on two core backend technologies ubiquitous in the web hosting space: __PHP__, a programming language whose name is a recursive acronym for "PHP Hypertext Preprocessor", for the server-side functionality and __MySQL__, a popular relational database engine, for storing data generated by the site and its users. Go into the dashboard of any web hosting provider you can find, and you'll be nearly certain to find some version of both PHP and MySQL there. PHP has a bad reputation for its idiosyncrasies (and rightly so, though the language has come a very long way in just the last few years), but it's undeniable that it has made server-side development accessible to many people and projects.

I was quite intrigued by Oxwall, even creating my own frontend theme for it, but my interest waned as it became clear that it was being effectively abandoned by its creators - the most recent release came out in July 2016. Meanwhile, neither PHP, MySQL, nor the web as a whole stopped evolving, each gaining new, powerful features that made developing with them simpler, safer, and more performant, and expanding the possibilities for what could be created with them. All these years later, revisiting Oxwall after years away from it and seeing its continued decay (its repository still gets a few commits every now and then, but nothing major), I decided to embark on a new project: _renovating Oxwall for 2024 and beyond._ Specifically:

- __Backend:__ ensuring that Oxwall can run on the most modern forms of its core technologies, at a minimum PHP 8.3 and MySQL 8.2. The INSTALL.md file in the repository lists PHP 5.2.6 and MySQL 5.0 as the minimum requirements, so there's bound to be many incompatibilities with modern PHP throughout the system;
- __Frontend:__ building a modern theme that lives up to today's (and tomorrow's) standards, and modernizing other core frontend components throughout the system. I still remember the days in which Oxwall came of age when CSS vendor prefixes and jQuery were almost required to ensure a consistent experience across a diversity of web browsers, but today's Chrome/WebKit-dominated landscape looks far different, and so too do their native technologies.
- _Bonus: Automated Testing?_ An essential part of any quality software development process, automated testing appears to be lacking within Oxwall. It may be a lot to handle with the other two goals, but building up the automated test suite might be worthwhile during this process.

Will this plan actually work out as I hope it will? There's only one way to find out; my aim is to to chip away at this, a little each day, posting (in technical detail) about some notable observations and achievements on a semi-regular basis, until I can look back and remark about how far this project has come. I hope you'll stay tuned and come away with something interesting.
